[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
An increasing number
of parents around the
world are struggling
to contend with a diagnosis
of autism in the family.
If you ask what causes it,
you'll get as many questions
as answers, which is
what happened to Rupert
Isaacson and his wife, Kristin.
They took matters, however,
into their own hands
when their son, Rowan, was
diagnosed, packed their bags,
and headed to Mongolia to meet
with some of the world's most
remote shaman.
Let's take a peek
at their journey.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-In April, 2004, my son, Rowan,
was diagnosed with autism.
[SCREAMING]
The feeling was like being hit
across the face with a baseball
bat.
Our lives became cloaked under
a mountain of conflicting
information on the disorder.
We tried everything.
He didn't speak to us.
One day, he ran away
from me and ran right up
to a horse school Betsy.
The moment I put
Rowan on Betsy's back,
he began to speak.
-He's a nice horse.
-As Rowan began to open up
to me for the first time,
a light bulb went on in my head.
Was there a place on earth that
combined healing with horses?
Mongolia.
This is a story about
how, as a family,
we did something
crazy, how we ended up
going halfway across the
world in search of a miracle.
-I think it wasn't exactly
Rowan's vision of Mongolia.
-We're going to go up a
several-thousand-foot mountain
and perform a four-hour
ritual with shamans.
Isn't that what all families do?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Sometimes I think he'
like leaping forward,
and sometimes it's like he's--
-I know.
- --totally regressing.
I couldn't help
wondering, did I really
have his best interest
at heart here?
-I don't know how
useful it is to think
of us as normal and
Rowan as the sick one.
-And then something happened.
Rowan began laughing, giggling.
We were together
again as a family.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
His autism forced
me to listen to what
interested him above all else.
We're onto something good here.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA: Well, this isn't
your typical response
to a diagnosis of autism
in the family for sure.
I mean, we're not suggesting to
anyone they have to pack it in,
get on a horse, ride
eight hours a day
into the wilderness to
find these remote shaman,
but you did.
>>RUPERT ISAACSON: We did.
>>REGINA: And you learned
a tremendous amount
through that process and
probably even more since then,
and I'd like to-- I don't know.
I want to precede this even,
because you and I were talking
off camera, and it just struck
me about you and your child,
Rowan.
What a beautiful
boy, by the way.
>>ISAACSON: Thank you.
>>REGINA: Beautiful boy.
And you were raised in London
as part of the public school
system, which, in our
parlance, is the private school
system, which is
really almost-- I mean,
you couldn't have a
more polarized reality
as two little boys
between you and your son.
What a divide.
And what had to be brought up
in you to contend with your son,
and just share a little bit
about your own background
growing up in this way.
>>ISAACSON: Well, I have
a hybrid background,
and I think that's always
been my main strength that I
could draw on.
Mongrel vigor.
>>REGINA: Mongrel vigor.
>>ISAACSON: Yes.
I have an interesting
background.
My mother is South African.
My father is Zimbabwean.
I was born and raised in the UK.
On my father's side,
which is Russian Jews,
who went to Africa.
On my mother's side were
Africanas and English
who went to Africa in
the late 17th century.
And we're very much part of
the problem of apartheid,
but we're also people who
fought against apartheid,
and were in jail fighting it.
So I came from a very
politicized family,
but I grew up in England
looking at this stuff.
Am I part of that, or am I part
of England, or what or what
or what?
>>REGINA: Oh, you were part of
the class that are considered
the masters of the universe.
>>ISAACSON: Well,
only by themselves.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
And Thomas Wolfe.
>>ISAACSON: Yes.
The problem with the English
public school system,
as we call it
there, is that it's
a system that brutalizes
you mentally, first
physically, and then mentally.
And the idea behind
it was that it
was going to create
hundreds of thousands
of young boys, who were
young men, who would go
out and administer the empire.
And if you go back 100
years, go back 200 years,
what England was up to then
was conquering the planet.
An awful lot of
manpower was needed
to have these guys at
18, 21, et cetera, going
to administer huge
areas of the Sudan
with an absolute sort of
firm belief in the empire--
>>REGINA: Certainty, yes.
>>ISAACSON: --in themselves.
And most of them died of
malaria, and most of them
were killed in native
skirmishes or whatever,
and they had to sort of
just go into these things.
It's the same ethos that
took us over the top
in the World War II trenches.
There's a good side to
it-- the courage, the grit.
When we were in World
War II, for example,
we wouldn't have gotten
through the blitz without that.
But in terms of a way to go
through the modern world,
it's redundant, really.
And so the problem was they told
us when we were little boys,
we're going to break
you down, and then we're
going to build you up again.
And as we were
talking off camera,
the problem with it
when you're a child
is that you believe
what adults tell you.
And so the reality for
me-- and for anyone
who went through the
system-- was what you first
contended with before the
physical stuff happened here
was this crushing, overwhelming
weight of adult sarcasm
and hostility that you couldn't
understand what you'd done.
>>REGINA: And brutality.
>>ISAACSON: Absolutely--
to engender.
And then, of course,
they beat you as well.
And then around about the
time you got to about 14,
and you started getting big,
they stopped beating you,
and they start giving
you privileges.
Right about the
time when you might
start fighting
back properly, then
you get the
privileges and so on.
>>REGINA: It's so
painful to even hear,
and I know other British
public school boys.
It's very painful.
>>ISAACSON: The worst of it--
and it's even more corrupt,
really, in a way-- because
among the privileges
is the ability to then
discipline and brutalize
younger boys.
So to visit upon
the younger boys
what's been visited upon you.
And I remember being faced
with that choice when
I was about 14, 15 and
realizing that this
was one of those absolute
parts, forks in life--
>>REGINA: A defining moment.
>>ISAACSON: Yes,
that I could either
be that problem that
I had been surviving,
or I could choose not to be.
But if I chose not to be, I
would get no brownie points
from the institution.
And I couldn't find
it in me to do it.
I did not want to be a prefect.
I did not want any jurisdiction
over the younger boys,
and I did not want to have
any part in their brutalizing.
And there were a lot of
people like me, obviously.
And thank god those
of us who made
that choice made that choice,
because I think if you make
the other choice, you then
have to spend the next 30, 40
years unlearning that
particular thing,
and you're almost hamstrung.
It's almost like having
a leg chopped off.
>>REGINA: Well, it's
so desensitizing.
Then you have to
try to re-salvage
those parts of the soul,
so to speak, once again.
>>ISAACSON: Exactly.
And if you then want to decent
family life or something
like that, then it's
going to be tough.
>>REGINA: And this all
happened in the city of London.
>>ISAACSON: This happened in
the financial district, yeah.
The school I was at was a very
old school, one of those 500
or 600-year-old schools
that had been started
to produce boys to enter
the financial industry, even
in the 15th century, by the
aldermen of the city of London.
City of London, if you're
an American viewer,
what we call the city,
you guys call Wall Street.
And it actually
means the same thing.
Wall Street is Wall
Street, because it's
withinside the old
walled compound
that the first Dutch
settlers put there
as a fortress, Battery
Park to the wall.
And it's the square mile
of the old Roman fortress
that became the medieval
financial district
that the Romans first put there
on top of the Celtic settlement
to make a bridgehead,
their fortress 2,000 years
before that in the UK.
So the same process
of colonization--
they were colonizing
from southern Europe
up into northern
Europe, and then
the northern Europeans
colonized over to North America,
and you had all the Indians, all
the Celts, all the [INAUDIBLE]
looking at them from
the forest going,
hm, this looks like trouble.
And indeed, it was.
>>REGINA: OK.
So there you are right
in the belly of at all,
receiving what is considered
to be the world's most
privileged education.
And we've already spoken to the
challenges of that, and that
the redundancy of it
really in today's time.
And alongside this, you
also had an affinity
for the equine world.
And you are a professional
horse trainer.
You're a horseman.
Talk a little bit about
how horses entered
into the picture, because
this will figure large
into this story.
>>ISAACSON: Well, my parents
are as open as can be.
Middle of London, school in
the middle of London-- horses
were always my thing.
But these things often skip
generations in families.
I come from a long line
of light cavalry officers,
particularly in South African.
>>REGINA: Light cavalry.
>>ISAACSON: Light cavalry,
irregular cavalry,
meaning the sort of special
forces type cavalry who
would be skirmishes
on the-- there
are many of my family had
their own regiments for this
in South Africa.
During the Bull War, in fact,
four of my great-great-uncles
had their own regiments
of light cavalry
on different sides of the wall.
They fought on different sides.
It runs in the blood.
And I was fortunate in that
I had an aunt, also South
African, who'd married into
the British fox hunting
culture in Leicestershire,
which is the seat of that.
There's a connection
between Leicestershire
and fox hunting and
the founding fathers,
which you might want to go into.
It's quite interesting.
>>REGINA: Oh, yes.
Just go ahead.
>>ISAACSON: Do you
want to digress?
>>REGINA: Yeah, I
don't mind digressing.
>>ISAACSON: The
sport of fox hunting
began in England
in the 18th century
with the invention of
the thoroughbred horse
and the addiction
to speed and hunting
small game fast across
country jumping big fences.
Incredibly dangerous.
The Duke of Wellington
called it the image of war
without its guilt, and
only 25% of it's dangerous.
So 25% of the danger of a
pitched battle is quite a lot,
and certainly
growing up with this,
I saw people killed
and maimed next to me.
So the action and the adrenalin
side of it is incredibly--
>>REGINA: You take risks.
>>ISAACSON: But more
than say, snowboarding.
And anyway, around
that time, that
was when the English gentlemen
who were going over to Virginia
and founding those big estates
like Lord Fairfax and so on,
and teaming up with
better families of that
like the Washingtons,
et cetera-- they all
had their own
packs of foxhounds,
because it was what Jefferson,
Fairfax, George Washington had
his own English foxhound.
So right when this
culture was coming
to fruition in that
part of England
where I was growing up,
in the mid-18th century,
it was also having a
parallel beginning here.
And it was almost
like freemasonry.
It's sort of one of
these codes of gentlemen.
>>REGINA: It is.
>>ISAACSON: Things
that people did,
and it was a test of encourage.
And people wanted to
know who you hunted with,
because if you hunted
here, it was fashionable,
because it was more dangerous.
If you hunted there, it
wasn't as fashionable.
>>REGINA: Well, I have
to say I had the-- well,
I was in a unique
situation one time, invited
to a dinner party in Virginia,
an estate near Monticello,
near Jefferson's estate.
And I wasn't aware
until I arrived--
I think I must have been
brought in as the entertainment
for the group.
>>ISAACSON: You
came out of a cake.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
something like that.
No.
I was actually an invited guest,
but multinationals corporation
heads-- I won't name some
of the corporations-- hotels
and so forth-- were at
the dinner party, which
was made vegetarian in
my honor, because I had
a vegetarian cooking
show at the time,
and the host just
happened to like me.
But I realized after
a minute or two,
this was all about
fox hunting season.
>>ISAACSON: Yes.
Virginia is the capitol here.
>>REGINA: And I realized this
was how these people connected
and gathered--
>>ISAACSON: It's an
international world.
>>REGINA: --same time each year,
and it was a global affair.
>>ISAACSON: The first job I
ever did when I came to America
was training horses in the
hunt field in Virginia.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
OK.
So now you had this
passion for horses,
and that's how you
began it, right?
>>ISAACSON: I did, yes.
And my parents
didn't have money.
You can go to these
private schools
and still not have money
if you have scholarships.
So I had a scholarship
as a choir boy.
I was a chorister at
the Temple Church.
If you're a conspiracy
theorist, and you
want to talk about the
Templars, and thereafter, I
was a chorister at
the Temple Church.
So there's the whole
other thing we could--
>>REGINA: We won't
talk about that.
Maybe in another show.
I don't want to
digress too far, but I
would love to do that
show with you as well.
>>ISAACSON: I was brought up
on the fringes of Dan Brown's
mind.
Put it that way.
And anyway, however, because
we had this family connection
with horses, and then I started
a junk store at a flea market
when I was 12 to raise
money to buy a horse
and would clear up people's
garages from junk and flog it,
and eventually
made enough money.
And then under the
tutelage of old Virginia,
old Leicestershire horse
guys, got a racehorse
off the track that was retired.
That's a way to
get a cheap horse.
And then retrained him
as a fox hunter and then
as a sport horse, as an event,
as a show jumper, et cetera,
until I knew that job very well.
And that's how you
become a professional is
that frequently, if you
don't really have the money
to enter at the top level, you
sort of have to enter where you
can, and then it's this
sort of professionals
to the wealthy people, who then
give you your apprenticeship.
And so I had that
apprenticeship.
And that's been
something that's lasted
through the rest of my life.
It's one the best things that
could have happened to me.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>ISAACSON: That's a
skill that will take you.
>>REGINA: You
would've never guessed
how profound those
implications would
be many, many years down the
road once you had your child.
OK.
So now we hear this
background, and most people
are thinking, well, what a
plummy life that's been so far,
right?
So now you marry your
beautiful wife, Kristin.
You have a child, and
the child is what?
Three or four years old
when you get the diagnosis?
>>ISAACSON: Two and 1/2, yeah.
>>REGINA: Two and 1/2.
And so he's screaming
uncontrollably
four hours at a time.
>>ISAACSON: Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: And now your life is
like going to hell in one way.
>>ISAACSON: Completely.
>>REGINA: But you love
this beautiful little boy,
and you have nothing
really in your background
is going to prepare
you to deal with this.
>>ISAACSON: Not as far
as I knew at that point.
>>REGINA: So let's
talk about it.
>>ISAACSON: Well, one
of the things that I am
is I'm a journalist, so
that's what I became.
Yes, I do horses.
And yes, I've done
them professionally.
I still do them professionally.
I'm also a journalist,
and I've written
for all the British
press, and I'm
an author and so on and so on.
And so I'm a trained
observer, and one thing
I could do, because
my son was nonverbal--
couldn't tell me
what he wanted--
but I could observe what he
did physically with his body
and follow that.
So what he wanted
to be was outside,
and he tantrumed less outside.
And there will be quite
a lot of viewers who are
dealing with autism right now.
For those viewers who are
dealing with autism right now,
I know what you're
going through.
I'll look at the camera.
I know what you're
going through.
I do.
Those incessant,
neurologically-based tantrums--
there's nothing you can do,
except try to prevent the child
from self-harming.
But out there in nature-- we
live in the countryside outside
of Austin, Texas in the woods.
He wasn't tantruming.
This was interesting,
so that's where we were.
And then one day he
saw my neighbor's mare
through the fence.
Now I had given up horses,
because I thought my son was
not safe around horses.
So for me, I gave
up the thing that
gave me the most joy
in life, and so you
can imagine what a downward
spiral of depression I was in.
I was heading down
a bottle quite fast.
But he spotted this
horse, and instead
of going right along the
trail as normal, went left,
and before I could grab him,
he'd gone through the fence
and was on his back
under her hooves.
And I thought he was
going to get trampled.
I'm going to win most rubbish
dad of the century here.
I'm terrified.
I'm crawling up to
try and grab him
to pull him back under the
wire, but instead something
rather amazing happened.
Betsy, the name of this
horse, bent her head to him
and began to lick and chew
and half closed the eye.
And that behavior, if
you're a horse trainer,
it's a submission and
acceptance gesture,
very similar to a dog
showing it's belly.
And there are many, many ways
you can get a horse to do this,
because they have very
structured hierarchies
in their herds, so it's
not difficult to behave
like a dominant horse and get
a horse to do this to you.
In fact, you have to really
as part of the training.
>>REGINA: Here, you're
talking about a little child.
>>ISAACSON: I hadn't seen a
horse offer it spontaneously,
not to anyone, let alone a
babbling two and 1/2 year
old autistic kid on his back.
So clearly, there's some direct
line that I don't understand,
but I can observe it.
So we would go back
and back to Betsy,
because he would just
run there in the morning.
And Betsy was an old quiet mare,
so I knew he wanted to get up.
He would show me by trying
to jump next to her.
So I would put him on her back.
She wasn't a big horse.
And I could hold him like
this while she grazed.
I knew the horse.
I knew she was quiet
and older, and all
of his stimming, all
the repetitive motions,
chanting, flapping,
that sort of thing
that we associate with
autism-- we call it stimming,
self-stimulatory
activity-- stopped
when he was up there like
that using her as a couch.
And it didn't occur to me
to ride with him, because I
come from the English
tradition where you don't learn
to ride in front of a parent,
because the English saddle
doesn't allow that.
You fall out the front.
So everyone starts on
the lunge line and so on.
But, of course, in
Texas, it's different.
So I spoke to my neighbor, and
he said, sure, give it a try.
And as luck would have
it, the saddle that he had
was for a big old Texas butt,
like a real oversized saddle.
So there's plenty of room for
me and him, and I got up there.
And on the first day that
I was riding with them,
I was sort of searching
for inspiration.
I always used to speak to
him sort of rhetorically,
a bit like having NPR
on in the background,
assuming that he was taking in
more than he was understanding,
receptive versus
expressive language.
And so I would always be
like, well, there's the sky.
It's blue.
What is the sky?
What is the pump?
What is oxygen?
What is the atmosphere?
What's the pulmonary system?
I'd talk like this,
because I thought, well,
one day, he probably will talk.
Anyway, we're up there.
I'm searching for
inspiration, so I said,
should we go to the
woods or the pond?
And he had echolalia, which is
where they will repeat things
that they hear,
and they'll often
repeat the last three
words you've said,
but they don't
really understand.
So he said, to the pond, which
is-- that's just echolalia.
Better than a kick
in the face, thought.
OK.
So we go down to the pond,
and a big blue heron gets up
and flaps away.
And he said, heron.
And I didn't know
he knew that word.
I'm like, oh,
>>REGINA: He's been listening.
He's been taking it
in on some level.
>>ISAACSON: And then I
start giving him choices,
and he starts taking the
choices, directions--
left, right, fast or slow.
And I noticed very, very quickly
within that first session
that the more I go with
the canter, the lope,
as the Western people call
it, the more speech I get.
And I don't know why.
I don't know what's going on.
>>REGINA: Some kind
of rhythmic something.
>>ISAACSON: Yes.
And subsequently, I
could now talk you
through the neurology of
exactly what was going on,
but at the time, had no idea.
So suddenly, I had
this thing that worked.
And it was ironic,
because that week
was the week that his speech
therapist gave up on him
and actually said,
sorry, I don't
think this kid will ever talk.
So we, for the next two
and 1/2, three years,
literally lived in the saddle
together three to four hours
a day.
And I took books up there.
I painted letters
on trees, and we'd
ride from one to the other,
putting them together into-- it
became "Lion King" characters.
He was into "The Lion King."
Intrinsic motivation--
there'd be a "Lion King"
toy waiting for him at the
end, and he learned to read.
And I did the same with
numbers, and he learned--
>>REGINA: As long as
he was on horseback.
>>ISAACSON: Yeah,
kinetic learning.
>>REGINA: But-- and the horse
was cantering at the time.
>>ISAACSON: Well, we got our
best results at the canter,
but you can't always canter.
>>REGINA: But that makes sense.
>>ISAACSON: But-- so when we
were working at the walk, say,
or the trot, I made sure that it
was the most rhythmic possible.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
because with autism,
this repetitious rhythmic
thing is going on anyway.
It's almost like
that laid a context.
>>ISAACSON: It's
actually for all of us.
It's just that it's
more acute with them.
>>REGINA: Yeah, interesting.
>>ISAACSON: So OK.
Then Mongolia happens.
The reason Mongolia happened
is I have another side of my--
>>REGINA: OK, I have a question
before you go any further.
Before we get to
Mongolia, I want
to talk about
horses for a moment,
because you went to find
amazing horsemen in Mongolia
that the shamans
associated with horse,
and then later reindeers.
Let's back up a sec.
What is it about horses?
And two of my friends
are equine therapists.
What is it about horses?
>>ISAACSON: The
horse-human connection?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ISAACSON: Well--
>>REGINA: Betsy would have known
to be gentle and submissive
to this little boy
under her hooves.
>>ISAACSON: I should
preface anything
I say by saying I'm
not a horse, and there
is a danger within
the equine therapy
world and the natural
horsemanship world and so on
to make assumptions that one
could speak for an animal.
And I'm very much of the belief
that that's actually hubristic
that one cannot.
>>REGINA: I think you're right.
It is.
But as best you know as a
human, what do you observe?
>>ISAACSON: So Betsy is the
alpha mare of that herd.
In wild horse behavior,
the alpha mare
is a position that they
have more or less for life.
>>REGINA: Alpha mare.
>>ISAACSON: Unlike
an alpha male.
An alpha male comes in, fights
his way out of a bachelor herd,
challenges the alpha
stallion, fights off
all comers for about two,
three years, then is exhausted
and is kicked out, and
another one comes in.
And his sole job really is
to provide sperm, the best
most vigorous sperm he can.
But he's usually not
the one who faces down
the predator, that
sort of thing,
makes the decisions about
when to change pastures or go
for water or that.
That's the alpha mare usually.
>>REGINA: The alpha mare.
OK, interesting.
>>ISAACSON: And the alpha
mare holds that position
until she's about
ready to keel over,
and frequently, it's her
daughter or a close relation
who will take it over.
So within the alpha mare psyche,
to take care of a juvenile
is very much part
of their makeup.
And you see this happen
across species all the time.
If you've ever had to
bottle raise a lamb,
it accepts the bottle from you.
It doesn't just reject you
because you're a predator.
And then it will go
live with your dogs,
and the dogs will accept
it as another dog.
I've got a baby
goat in the house
right now that that's the story.
We see this kind of cross
species nurturing going on.
You'll see a dog will
suckle another species.
The list goes on.
So I think there was
something of that,
but there is an intangible
bond between the human
and the horse, because
the horse is not
the most effective and reliable
transport animal that we have.
Mules, donkeys, and camels
are much more reliable.
Elephants are, ironically,
easier to train than horses.
Horses are completely
dominated by their amygdala.
We're going to return to the
amygdala in a minute talking
about autism, which is
the part of your brain
that governs fight,
flight, and freeze.
And they solve their problems
by running away violently.
>>REGINA: Right, they spook.
>>ISAACSON: And they
weigh what a truck weighs.
And you're working
with this thing.
Everyone who works
with horses gets hurt.
Why do we continue to do it?
Well, obviously,
in the old days,
there was no thing
that you could
go to battle on that
was as effective--
>>REGINA: Well, speed.
>>ISAACSON: --for
that very reason.
Well, there's many things
that are as fast as a horse.
An elephant's as
fast as a horse.
>>REGINA: Really?
>>ISAACSON: Yeah, yeah.
I mean your average horse.
Not a racehorse, but an elephant
could do 30, 35 miles an hour
for sure, yeah.
Camels go fast, but
horses are maneuverable,
and horses have a certain
aggression in them
that you can tap into.
And then they can
become an extension
of the human on their back.
And it's this quality
they have more
than any of the others
except, perhaps,
the elephant of draft
animals that carry us,
that makes a horse exceptional.
So a human being can project
his thoughts, his/her thoughts
and dreams through the horse.
So what horses represent
to us is dream and freedom.
And we become superhuman
the moment we're on a horse.
We're more beautiful, because
horses are so aesthetically
beautiful, so the
moment we sit on one,
we become part of that beauty.
>>REGINA: It's true.
People feel transformed.
>>ISAACSON: Well,
they are transformed.
And one of the
problems with this
is that it can lead to
an explosion and then
implosion of the human ego.
A lot of horse people are
not terribly nice people,
because you are bigger,
better, faster as long
as you're on that horse.
As soon as you
get off the horse,
you're like anybody else.
So if you live your
life on horseback--
>>REGINA: Yeah, just take that
to the extreme in the polo
clubs.
>>ISAACSON: Absolutely.
You can start to really
believe your own BS there.
Now the horse will
chuck you up from time
to time in front of people
and embarrass you, which
brings you back down to earth.
But nonetheless, that's
why the kings would always
say it was the only
honest counselor they
had was their horses.
The horse would dump you
in front of your populace.
But even your faithful
do won't do that.
So horses do play this
role with humanity,
and I think that
in the 6,000 years
or so that we've
domesticated them,
there's been a human-horse
connection that's
caused a certain genetic melding
of certain types of people
with that animal like
there's dog people,
there's horse people,
there's elephant people,
there's camel people,
bird people, et cetera.
So Rowan comes from a
line of horse people.
It seems to be
there, and that seems
to be perhaps what's going
on with the Betsy connection.
But of course, there's an
intangible beyond that that one
can't put one's finger on.
It's a spiritual connection.
And the whole
point of the spirit
is one isn't supposed
to understand it.
I'm very comfortable
saying I don't know.
I don't understand, but
I'm very grateful that I'm
a recipient of that
spiritual generosity.
>>REGINA: OK.
So from there, we take
the spirit to Mongolia.
Your wife says, are you crazy?
What are you doing
to our family?
What are you doing to me?
What are you doing to our son?
But you all packed up, and--
>>ISAACSON: Well, there was
a reason we went to Mongolia.
It wasn't a random decision.
I have another professional
side of my life
that we haven't discussed.
I'm a human rights
advocate in Africa.
My area is finding legal title
to ancestral land for hunting
and gathering tribes.
So imagine in America 150 years
ago before Indian reservations,
there were people out there
working on behalf of, say,
the Navajo tribe
or another tribe
to get them legal
title to this area,
fighting it through
in government,
and getting those
people onto there.
And that would be me, and
I've done that in Botswana
with hunting and gathering
called the Bushmen.
And it's because of my
family connections to them.
So the year that Rowan
was diagnosed with autism,
and the same year
that he met Betsy,
I had to bring a
delegation of Bushmen
to the United Nations and
the US State Department,
preparing to taking their
government to court.
And some of these guys
on that delegation
were trained healers and
shamans in their own culture.
They met Rowan as
part of the journey.
And they naturally said, oh,
we could do some work on him.
And I thought, well, why not?
Knock yourselves out.
It's just prayer.
Go for it.
And to my-- it was intriguing.
Rowan really lost a lot of
the most obsessive symptoms
of his autism in the five
days that he was with them.
Now he fell back
again when they left,
but I couldn't help but notice,
OK, radical and positive
reaction to the horse.
Radical and positive
reaction to these shamans.
And I'm familiar with
that world anyway,
because I saw my first
shamanic ceremony
on my grandfather's farm in
Zimbabwe when I was seven.
We talked about my
English upbringing.
We haven't talked about
my African upbringing.
I had a hybrid, slightly
schizophrenic upbringing.
So to me, all the
other things we
were trying-- the collation
therapy, the ABA therapy,
the behavioral therapy, the
speech therapy, the OT, all
that were not really
working very well.
>>REGINA: Well, you
see in the film,
I mean just the
cocktails in the morning
that you were putting together
to get the right nutrients
and probiotics and vitamins
and everything else.
>>ISAACSON: And we
weren't even giving drugs.
We were just trying to do all
these supplements and so on.
>>REGINA: Everything
that you knew to do.
>>ISAACSON: We did.
But nothing happened as
radical as a reaction
as these two things, so it was
natural for me to say, well,
is there somewhere on the planet
that combines these two things?
And if so, should we go there?
It's not Africa, because
it's not a horse culture.
It's not here, because the
horse doesn't come from here.
Where does the horse come from?
Mongolia.
>>REGINA: OK.
Let's take a little
look at a clip.
OK.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
-Our guide, Tulga, picked
us up at the airport
and took us into the
capital of Ulan Bator.
I don't know what I
was expecting exactly,
but this depressed, post-Soviet
city wasn't quite it.
I'd expected the open step,
nomads, horses, Genghis Khan
and all his warriors,
not an urban slum.
-I think it wasn't exactly
Rowan's vision of Mongolia.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA: OK.
So you arrived, essentially,
as you say, a Soviet slum.
>>ISAACSON: Ulan Bator.
>>REGINA: And you go
from there, but let's
talk about the
quality of the people
you were meeting once you
got away from the city.
>>ISAACSON: Even in the
city, actually, in Mongolia,
you're either in the middle
of a sort of post-Soviet slum,
or you're on the
step with nomads,
and there's no like transitions.
>>REGINA: There are no suburbs.
>>ISAACSON: No,
there's no suburbs,
and there's no farmland.
So the people in the
city really told us
we have the same quality as
the people in the countryside.
And the people in the
countryside are all Buddhists.
They're incredibly
accepting people.
They're incredibly open people.
They're incredibly warm people.
Even though life is
physically quite demanding,
the quality of
life is very high.
Everyone is self-determined.
They have gender equality.
They all have enough physical
resources for well-being.
They're living very,
very close to nature
in a very fulfilling way--
horses, working with livestock,
working with ancestors, this
shamanic spiritual technology
that they're using all the
time alongside the Buddhism.
So this creates happy human
beings, who are very accepting.
And it's interesting, because
they weren't always like that.
If you think about what
Mongolia represented
in the medieval times--
>>REGINA: Genghis Khan.
>>ISAACSON: Yeah, they would
explode every two generations
and kill everybody from the
Pacific to the Mediterranean,
and they go home again.
And what made them
stop, and what
made them stop was
in the 17th century,
some Tibetan monks walked
over the Altai Plateau,
and introduced this
idea called Buddhism.
And it was one of those
moments in history
a little bit like
the fall of apartheid
or the bringing down
of the Berlin Wall
or really the birth
of the United Nations
and the EU after World
War II and 10,000
years of tribal warfare in
Western Europe of people
sort of collectively
saying, yeah, you know what?
Why are we doing this?
And choosing this better way.
>>REGINA: But, still
that hardiness.
>>ISAACSON: They're hardy,
but they're not aggressive.
>>REGINA: Right, exactly.
That's a beautiful
combination of traits.
>>ISAACSON: But loving.
They're compassionate.
What defines Buddhism
is compassion.
>>REGINA: Right.
The other thing that
has always struck me
about their lifestyle in other
films and books I've read
and so forth is that there
is this element that's
incorporated that there's
still time to create beauty
in their homes-- the textiles,
the colors, the carvings,
the paintings.
This is beautiful.
>>ISAACSON: This is
what you see actually
in all indigenous societies.
There's this idea that you need
to work as frenetically as we
do to have leisure to create
art, conversation, cuisine,
culture.
That's not true.
What you need is
competence economically.
So if you're economically
competent at sheep rearing,
if you're economically competent
at hunting and gathering,
if you're economically
competent at Wall Street,
actually all roughly
amounts to the same thing
that you have a certain
leisure time, therefore,
to indulge in the
arts and the sciences.
>>REGINA: And they do.
And it's represented
in every home.
>>ISAACSON: Absolutely, they do.
No, absolutely.
The quality of life
is very high that way.
>>REGINA: So you have
high quality of life.
You have peaceful
people who are hardy,
but who have also
carried through
their shamanic traditions.
>>ISAACSON: Yes.
>>REGINA: And so let's talk
about the initial contact.
When you're watching
the film-- hey,
let's just put a little
cut here in the film, where
I think it's Kristin is dealing
with the shaman, who saying,
OK, this is for the parents too.
And she's out of breath
jumping up and down,
and there's a little
flogging and such going on.
Let's just show a
little bit of this.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-OK.
-OK, it's all done now.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA: Can you tell us
what that was all about?
>>ISAACSON: Yes, I can.
>>REGINA: Are you trying
to get rid of the evil--
>>ISAACSON: No, I was as
freaked out and bemused by that
as you would be, because
I had so much experience
with shamanism in
Africa with the Bushmen,
where their method of doing
it is completely different.
And the Bushmen healer
suffers for you.
If you have a Bushmen
healer working on you,
he'll be pulling at you,
and you'll see him bleed.
He'll bleed.
He'll physically
start to bleed, things
like this on your behalf.
He takes on all the pain.
You feel this absolute
sort of blissful
buzzing through your body.
But the opposite in Mongolia.
The idea is that
it's a catharsis.
>>REGINA: You all
took a beating.
>>ISAACSON: So we got whipped.
We got vodka and reindeer
spat in our faces.
Kristin had to wash
her lady parts out,
her childbearing
parts out with vodka.
On camera, there's
this hilarious bit
in the movie, where Michael,
who's making the documentary,
is trying to be true
to the documentary,
but he's desperately
embarrassed,
because Kristin's washing
out her vagina with vodka.
And she sort of turns
to him and says,
well, you'll Photoshop
out my cellulite, right?
And it's sort of that
moment of wry humor
like we're all in this together.
And Rowan's reaction
initially was not good,
and I thought, oh, dear.
Have I made a terrible,
terrible, terrible mistake?
What happened was halfway
through that first ceremony
that was so difficult
and challenging,
something shifted, and
his mood went 180 degrees,
and he started giggling,
laughing, joking, playing
with the shamans.
And then in between
sessions with them,
he turned to this
boy about a year
older than him, who was
there, who turned out
was the son of our guide.
But we hadn't been
introduced at that point,
didn't know who he was.
And opened his arms
and hugged this boy
and said, Mongolian brother.
And he hadn't reached out
to any other child ever.
He had played a bit when
other children were there
in what's called parallel
play, where he'll
play while another child plays.
But no interaction.
>>REGINA: No
engaging, no physical.
>>ISAACSON: Zero.
And it happened there, and
that caused Tulga, our guide,
to say, well, maybe I
should bring Tomoo, my son,
on this journey, so it was two
fathers and their children.
And that turned
out to be the best
decision that could've been.
Now this happened in
that shamanic ceremony.
He made his first
friend, and he went
from being completely
freaked out to suddenly being
completely tickled and
giggly about the whole thing.
Something shifted, and
then it began to rain,
and certain birds
flew in, all of which
are shamanic signs of blessing.
>>REGINA: And good fortune.
>>ISAACSON: And good fortune,
sort of ubiquitously no matter
where you are in the world.
And then we began the
journey from there,
but I do have to say
that if I had really
felt that Rowan was
in any sort of danger
or that we were be
exploited in any way,
I'd have wrapped the whole
thing up and gone home.
I'm a realist.
I'm not-- there's not a
new age bone in my body.
>>REGINA: Nor your wife's.
>>ISAACSON: No.
I mean, I have long hair,
so people think I'm-- no,
I have long hair I listened to
too much heavy metal when I was
a teenager.
>>REGINA: There you go.
Metallica, there you go.
>>ISAACSON: And it's Peter
Pan syndrome, which I'm not
proud of, but there you go.
But I'm very
practical by nature.
>>REGINA: But you were
getting enough signs
along the way and
enough validation.
But I want to bring
something up here.
You talk about in the
documentary-- they brought it
up-- that these shaman, as
they were working on your son,
and I made a note
as I was watching
this early on when your son
was having a tantrum at home.
I thought, god, it's
almost the little guy
has someone surfing off
him, almost like he's
acting in a possessed way.
And I say that loosely
speaking, but when
they start working on
them, they were saying,
no, there is this relative
from your wife's bloodline,
the grandmother,
I believe it is.
Who is--
>>ISAACSON: Not being helpful.
>>REGINA: She was attaching
herself to your son.
And that brings up a
whole array of questions.
>>ISAACSON: Certainly.
The easiest--
>>REGINA: And when they
made that detachment
is when you started
seeing breakthroughs,
when they started having
the entity move on.
>>ISAACSON: Yes, and
what's interesting
about the whole idea
of ancestors, which
is how shamanism works, so
the way shamanism works,
very briefly, it's very
simple how shamanism works.
It doesn't matter whether it's
Native America, the Bushmen,
the Arctic, Aboriginals.
No matter where you
are on planet Earth,
it's the same,
because this goes back
to the earliest days of what
it means to be a human being.
So when a shaman goes into the
altered state of consciousness
that they need to go
into in order to heal,
they enter the spirit world.
And when they enter
the spirit world,
they talk specifically
to ancestor spirits,
to nature spirits, and to God.
And there's a sort of a
three in one, one in three.
They sort of are each
other and not each other,
but those are the
three basic entities.
And then they come out with
a series of instructions,
and the ancestor spirits
seem almost always there
trying to help.
But occasionally,
they're getting it wrong.
So it's not that
it's malevolent.
It's more that someone
might be carrying
their human insecurities
over with them or something
like that.
And by releasing this person,
this child, or whoever
from the ailment that
they're suffering,
you then release
that ancestor spirit
from what was holding
them back on it.
So it's sort of cyclical.
And this goes to the
core of the human psyche,
so much so that if
you think about it
in modern medical terms, one
person's DNA and genetics is,
of course, another
person's ancestors.
What is genetics, if not
the study of your ancestors?
So really, it's speaking
the same language
but in different motifs.
>>REGINA: Well, depending on
the dimension you're looking at,
so to speak, and a
realm you're looking at,
it's the same thing
carrying for the same bonds,
the same attachments.
It's in the spirit world or
through your physical DNA,
that's how it attaches.
>>ISAACSON: Absolutely.
And by the way,
with that said, I
think people should
be skeptical.
I think skepticism is a
very healthy human trait.
Show me the money.
You don't want someone
coming up and saying, well,
I'm a shaman, because I went
for a two-day shamanic retreat
in Boulder, Colorado.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
But-- OK, now let's
move this story forward.
>>ISAACSON: And here's 10,000.
Give me 10 grand, and
I'll heal your kid.
You don't want that.
>>REGINA: No, and
I'm with you on that.
The proof's in the
pudding, as they say.
>>ISAACSON: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: So you
started seeing proof.
You started seeing
a shift in him
after this ceremony in which the
grandmother's energy was asked
to please leave the child.
>>ISAACSON: Exactly.
And we had to do
a sort of homework
each night of certain
little ceremonies with him.
>>REGINA: Now let's go
on to the reindeer people
and what happened.
Now mind you, Rowan was
how old at this time?
Three or four?
>>ISAACSON: Five and a half.
>>REGINA: Five and a half.
And he was still incontinent.
>>ISAACSON: Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: And so you
guys could not train him.
>>ISAACSON: No washing machines,
by the way, on the set.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I know.
There's one scene in there.
Yeah, and you called it what?
The brown--
>>ISAACSON: Code brown.
>>REGINA: Code brown.
So you had a lot of
code browns, where
he's pooping his pants a lot.
>>ISAACSON: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And so this is
obvious-- any parent could
say, five and a half years
of pooping your pants-- that
would be enough for me
right there to drive me out
of my mind.
And the other stuff aside.
So this was a significant
issue in your lives,
and now let's talk about
the reindeer people.
And then what happened?
>>ISAACSON: OK.
So we eventually traveled
up to southern Siberia,
which is where the
reindeer people live.
And the reindeer people
are different to the people
of the plains, the horse people.
They're older.
The culture's older.
The first large animal,
in fact, after the ice age
that was domesticated
was the reindeer.
All the other ones that
we know came later.
And so it's a very,
very ancient culture
and a non-warrior culture.
Very peaceful culture, and they
live entirely off the reindeer.
They ride them.
It's like going to fairyland.
It's like the land of the
snow queen when you go there.
People are riding around--
>>REGINA: And you
arrive there expecting
to meet the top--
you'd been told
you could meet the
top shaman there,
who was, I guess,
elderly or not well.
>>ISAACSON: Absolutely.
A guy called Ghoste, yes.
And when you go to meet shamans,
one of the things you know
is that there's no guarantee.
I've had experience
with this before.
There's no guarantee that they
will agree to work with you.
They may not think they can.
You may not be
able to find them,
because they've
gone somewhere else,
and you've got to travel
four days on horseback
to go get them or something.
Any number of things, and
so it's quite fraught.
But we did find
Ghoste, and Ghoste
did agree to work on Rowan.
And Ghoste is the name of this
healer of the reindeer people.
>>REGINA: Can we look
at that in the film?
>>ISAACSON: Yeah, absolutely.
>>REGINA: I mean,
it's really-- it's
quite a dramatic-looking
characterization
for any shaman the
way he appeared,
and you were in the yurt.
>>ISAACSON: The ger.
>>REGINA: The ger.
>>ISAACSON: Well,
actually then, teepees.
>>REGINA: Tee pees.
OK, so you're in the teepee.
So we're going to pick the
film up at that place, OK?
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[DRUMMING]
-[CHILD TALKING]
-Just sit quietly.
Sit quietly.
-Wow.
That's the shaman.
He's an eagle.
He going on the tree,
and an eagle nest.
-Drink water.
Drink the water.
[WHINING]
-Drink water.
Drink it.
[DRUMMING]
-[CHILD TALKING]
-[NON-ENGLISH]
-He says it'd be fine if the--
-Did you see?
There's a baby elk.
-[NON-ENGLISH]
-Uh-huh.
He thinks he will be
better by tomorrow.
-OK.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>ISAACSON: So what was going on
there, which is so interesting,
was there, the way
the healing turned out
was much closer to the Bushmen.
And he didn't
touch Rowan at all.
He danced.
He got himself into the state
of altered consciousness
on the drum, dancing
his way in senior.
He could do it very quickly.
And he did several things.
He offered run a small bowl
of reindeer milk, which
of course, Rowan rejected
and knocked out of his hand.
And he caught it on
his drum and noted
which side it had landed on.
And then he took off
his headdress, which
is always a bird headdress.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ISAACSON: And
gave it to Rowan.
And Rowan accepted it, and
then turned around and put it
on his own head and
then put it on my head.
And at that point, Ghoste
put the drum down and said,
we're done.
And that was maybe 15 minutes.
We traveled so
long to get there.
And so he lit up a cigarette.
And it's like,
OK, yeah, be cool.
>>REGINA: They all smoked.
>>ISAACSON: Yes, of course.
They smoked, they drank.
They're people.
And they chase
each other's wife.
They do the stuff
that people do.
They're not saints.
They're just people with
an affinity for healing.
And he said, OK, the stuff
that really drives you crazy--
the incontinence, the
tantruming, that stuff-- that
will all end right now.
But to confirm this
healing, you're
going to have to do three more
journeys over the next three
years.
It doesn't matter where you go.
I know-- we talked.
So he says, I know you
have an African background.
I know you've got the Bushmen.
I've heard of those guys.
I know they're
very good healers.
You don't have to
come back here,
because I understand
that getting
to this mountain in
Siberia is very difficult,
and it's not really reasonable
to come back here every-- you
know, we're talking like that.
And he said, but you
are going to have to do
these three more journeys.
And I said, OK,
fine, but what do
you mean it's going
to stop right now?
Because I've been
around a lot of shamans.
They like to hedge their
bets a bit like doctors do
and accountants.
It's very rare that they'll
say, oh, it'll happen tomorrow.
But we rode back
down that mountain,
and 27 hours-- we counted it--
after leaving the reindeer
camp, Rowan did his
first intentional poo
and cleaned himself,
and it's on camera.
And for me, that was like
watching England win the World
Cup, which will never happen.
And I couldn't believe it.
And then we counted
in the two weeks
that it took to get from that
river back to Austin, Texas
where we live, because
we had to travel,
and then we went via
London, et cetera.
And we counted six
tantrums of any note.
Normally, that would have
been one day's worth.
So what he also left
behind him in Mongolia
was the inability
to make friends.
He continued to develop
the friendship with Tomoo.
>>REGINA: That little boy.
>>ISAACSON: And then
when he got back,
he made friends with all the
kids in the neighborhood.
So he came back-- he
went out autistic.
He came back autistic.
I looked at the camera.
I said, Rowan was
not cured of autism.
Shamanism doesn't cure autism.
Horses don't cure autism.
Nothing cures autism.
Autism is a way of being.
But there are challenges
within autism-- say,
incontinence or sensory issues
or neurological issues--
that we can address.
And they had been addressed,
and so he came back
a much, much more
functional autistic person.
And from there,
never looked back.
And we did to make those
three subsequent journeys.
I wrote about them.
I have a new book that's
about to come out.
>>REGINA: I was going
to ask you that.
Tell us what happened
after Mongolia.
>>ISAACSON: OK.
So after-- there's
this book in this film
called "The Horse Boy,"
which tells the story
through Mongolia.
Now there's a book called
"The Long Ride Home,"
and it tells the story of those
three journeys and everything
we've done subsequently
to sort of move this
into helping other kids.
>>REGINA: How old is Rowan?
>>ISAACSON: He's 13.
So the first journey we
did was to the Bushmen,
who I know personally, to
healers that I know personally.
And what resulted after
that, which was so bizarre,
was this mathematical dialogue.
There had been nothing
of that really.
We'd done basic numeracy.
But suddenly, Rowan was
mathematically agile, verbally,
mentally, and so
on in this way that
hadn't shown up before
when we came out of there.
The second year we
were in Australia
with a very, very
good Kuku Yalanji
shaman up in the Daintree
Rainforest, which is just
below New Guinea in that
subtropical area by Cape
Tribulation.
And after that, Rowan developed
what was called theory of mind.
I'll tell you exactly
what happened.
Theory of mind is when you
understand that I think
something different to you.
So the best way to
understand it is
let's say there was a
picture of an elephant here,
and you have a two and
1/2, three-year-old kid.
They'll pick it up
seeing the elephant
and say, hey, look,
Mommy, an elephant,
thinking that you can
see what they see.
Somewhere around three and
1/2, they'll go, hey, look,
Mommy, an elephant.
They'll turn it around.
And this is a milestone
that almost all kids
meet like speech, like pointing,
like all these other things
autistic people don't do without
you noticing it as a parent.
But of course, it's
a hard one there,
and its perspective taking
as a survival skill.
You've got to have this.
He played his first
practical joke on me
as we were driving back out
from that rainforest of--
>>REGINA: And humor is subtle.
It's his nuanced
way of thinking.
>>ISAACSON: Absolutely.
And Kristin, who's a
developmental psychology--
professor of
>>REGINA: Your wife.
>>ISAACSON: --at the
University of Texas, his mom,
was sitting next to me
was like, oh, my god.
That's theory of mind.
I'm like, well, what do
you mean theory of mind?
I don't know the psycho speaker.
And she explained it.
And sure enough, he had
made that leap, and then
the third year, we went
on the Navajo reservation
here with a very
good Navajo shaman.
I have a bit of a background
in the Navajo reservation,
which we haven't gone into,
but I knew where to go.
And what we got after that was
proper conversation at last,
and it was incredible.
We were driving out after
the three days of ceremony,
out of the Navajo reservation.
There's Mount Taylor
hovering above the desert
like Kilimanjaro, this
sort of cloud floating
in the air above the desert.
It was so beautiful at dawn.
And, of course, because
it's America, it's prosaic.
Underneath Mount
Taylor is a truck stop,
a McDonald's, and a casino.
And we stopped between
there and Albuquerque.
We know that's where
we can get food.
So we stop, and
Rowan wants to have
one of those horrible
fruity-flavored sugary drinks
with food dyes in it, which
I know will send him squiffy.
And I wanted to have juice.
He doesn't want to have juice.
And he's like, fruity-flavored,
fruity-flavored.
He's still speaking
this sort of code
and having this massive
tantrum on the ground with all
the truckers looking at me.
Yes, I'm the hippie
parent, the bad parent.
Yes, that's me.
And we get back into
the car, and I'm grumpy.
He's grumpy, and I'm
saying, fine, fine.
Just be grumpy.
Spoil the whole day.
So I become a
three-year-old basically.
And we're driving out,
and he says to me, Dad,
I'm not being grumpy.
I'm just telling you
what drink I want.
>>REGINA: That's a different way
of handling things then, Dad.
>>ISAACSON: Kristin and I,
we just pulled the car over
onto the shoulder
of the freeway,
I thought here and was
like, what did you say?
And it never went
back from there.
So what happened was we
realized that the shamans thing
and the horse thing was
very personal to us,
but what we had discovered was
that if you observe your child,
and if you put your
child in nature,
and if you allow your child
to move in certain ways,
and this is why I
go back to the lope
and these rhythmic
movements on the horse.
You could emulate a lot of
these results we were getting
with Rowan without the
kids, and the reason
I knew this was when we go back
from Mongolia, I got curious.
Was it just my son, or
was it other kids too?
We now have one child in
68 over the age of eight
with autism, one boy in 56 over
the age of eight with autism.
So it's not difficult to
find other autistic kids.
So I started running unofficial
play dates with the horses,
and also, on play equipment,
because most of the time,
they weren't on the horse.
And I noticed it was
certain types of movement.
>>REGINA: That swings.
I mean, OK.
There you go.
>>ISAACSON: And we eventually
took this to the neurologists
and said, what's going on?
And they said, ah, look at the
way the hips are being rocked.
This is oxytocin.
You're creating enormous
amounts of oxytocin in the kids.
What's oxytocin?
The bliss, happiness,
communication, trust--
>>REGINA: Bonding chemical.
>>ISAACSON: --and
communication hormone.
And basically, what we'd lucked
into was a discovery of this.
The basic problem with
autism, if that's the brain,
there's your amygdala.
The amygdala is what
governs your fight, flight,
and freeze response and produces
cortisol, your stress hormone.
Many FMRI scans on autistic
people-- for example,
Dr. Temple Grandin has
gone in for an FMRI scan
as part of this
experiment-- show
that a lot of autistic people
have overdeveloped amygdalas.
That part of their
brain is way more
developed than yours
or mine, perhaps.
So they're suffering from much
more anxiety, much more fear,
et cetera, producing
much more cortisol.
Then you've got the nervous
system is being triggered
to give misinformation.
So the easiest
way I can give you
to get you to understand
that is if you'll just
humor me for second.
Lick your finger, and wave
it around for a second.
Can you do that?
Does it feel hot or cold?
>>REGINA: Cold.
>>ISAACSON: Right.
Why?
Because as the water evaporates
from your epidermis--
but you're getting the
correct information.
But imagine if you didn't.
Imagine if for that moment,
someone flipped a wrong switch,
and it suddenly felt
like I'd held your finger
to the hot burner of the stove.
How would you react?
You'd melt down.
You'd fall to the ground.
You'd scream.
>>REGINA: You'd be overly
reactive all the time.
>>ISAACSON: Yes, and
the gents in white coats
would be along to cart
you off to the funny farm
and pump you full of drugs.
So this is what's going on
for these kids all the time.
By putting them into
this form of movement
in natural environment when
none of these bad sensory
triggers like fluorescent strip
lights, like echoey spaces,
like industrial noise, like the
hum of a refrigerator or an air
conditioner, like a yappy
dog, like cigarette smoke,
like perfume, like a million
of these things which
could set them off into
this negative cycle
between this overdeveloped
amygdala and this misfiring
nervous system, you take
those triggers away,
and you start filling them
with the opposite of cortisol.
Oxytocin-- it's the antidote.
What cortisol does is
it narrows your focus.
If a bloke came through the
wall there with a kitchen knife,
you couldn't be learning
about horse work.
You could deal with the bloke.
You're not going to learn
calculus while the elephant is
charging at you.
It narrows your
focus on the threat.
So if your brain is
constantly telling you
that there's an elephant
coming through the wall,
you haven't got time
to learn anything else.
Nothing to do with
your intellect.
>>REGINA: Very
narrow-minded focus.
>>ISAACSON: Exactly.
Your intellect is capable of it,
but the hormones won't let it.
So what oxytocin does is it
gives you perspective focus.
It's like, hm, maybe I do
want to go to India next year.
I've always wanted
to learn French,
or I wonder what's over there.
That's that frame of mind.
So you put the kid in
that frame of mind,
but then three more
amazing things happened.
With this kind of rocking
and bouncing motion,
your cerebellum is activated.
Your cerebellum produces--
if you can remember this,
I'll give you a gold star--
the cerebellum produces
a series of cells within the
brain with a funny name called
Purkinje cells.
Purkinje cells act as
circuits within the brain that
get the different parts of your
brain to talk to each other.
Guess what.
In autistic people,
frequently, they
have a real deficit
of Purkinje cells.
So you get massive development
of this part of the brain,
not so much development
in that part of the brain.
And suddenly, you're
dealing with that problem.
And one of the bits of the brain
that the Purkinje cells allow
to talk to the rest of the
brain is the prefrontal cortex.
And the prefrontal
cortex is the CEO.
It's what governs reason
and emotional regulation.
And so suddenly, these
kids are learning
and able to control their
emotions and able to reason
and so on, and finally,
through the Purkinje cells,
the prefrontal cortex can
talk to the amygdala and say,
you know what?
There isn't an
elephant coming out
of the bush every five seconds.
So you can relax.
And so then you create
a positive cycle.
So we opened a center,
where we train people
how to do this with horses,
with play equipment.
>>REGINA: I was going to
say those little swings that
rock automatically.
>>ISAACSON: Yes, the Gaiam
balls that you sit on,
the Gaiam exercise balls.
I'll plug your product.
No, absolutely.
So if the kid is in the back
of the class rocking his chair,
it should not have the chalk
rubber thrown at his head
or be sent outside.
He's doing what he
needs to do to learn.
He's creating oxytocin.
And when you see an
autistic person rocking,
they always rock creating
oxytocin to self-soothe.
If you and I meet each
other, and we're all friends,
we'll give each other a hug.
That will get some oxytocin, but
if you are having a hard time,
and I want to comfort
you, I will rock you.
If I have my baby in
my arms, I rock him.
It's hard wired.
And all the things that we
do where our hips are rocked
make us feel globally
a sense of well-being.
So rocking chairs,
dance, making love.
When you make love,
you don't just
feel a localized pleasure
in your genitals.
We hope, anyway, that you
feel this global sense
of well-being.
Why?
It's the oxytocin at work.
So we had lucked into something
very simple and very profound
that could work massively
with the horses,
because the movement
of the horse's hips
is so powerful that it gives
you more oxytocin for your buck
than anything else.
But most people aren't on
horseback 90% of the time.
But what about a swing?
What about the pool?
What about a trampoline?
What about my shoulders?
What about a wheelbarrow?
What about all sorts of
ways that we could do this?
So we now have three programs,
and we have Horse Boy Method
with horses, which is a
therapeutic riding program that
is now in 11 countries,
and it's just
been adopted in Germany
as the official autism
treatment with equine therapy.
We have Horse Boy
Learning, which
is a home school program, a
kinetic learning home school
program, where we put the
child in nature in all these
rocking balancing
things, and then we
show them how to learn the
national curriculum this way.
This is what we started doing
with homeschooling with Rowan,
and we realized it was doable.
But then we thought,
most people are not
going to do it to this degree.
So then we come
up with something
called movement method, which
is the basic way for training
your brain, whether you're
suffering from anxiety,
depression, PTSD,
eating disorders,
let alone autism, ADD,
ADHD, and it works.
And it's learning how to
put you or someone you know
or your child through these
very simple movements daily
to retrain the brain
into that positive cycle.
And so this is sort
of now what we do,
and so shamelessly plugging
my book, "The Long Ride Home,"
that's what it talks about.
The reason I want to
shamelessly plug it is this.
At our center in Texas
where we work now,
if you are a family
within 100 miles of us,
all our services
are completely free.
So obviously, by selling
copies of the book,
I'm going to fund the program.
So please, everyone, by a
copy of "The Long Ride Home."
Get it on Amazon.
But more than that, if you're
in some sort of difficulty,
contact us, because we do a
lot of our training by webinar,
and it's very, very
easy to train people
into this basic brain
training technique,
and then you're
good to go already.
And you don't have to spend
money on expensive therapists,
and you don't have to be
prey to people saying,
oh, this treatment's going
to cost you $100,000.
No, no, no, no.
It's much, much, much simpler.
>>REGINA: It's more
primitive than that.
>>ISAACSON: It's more--
>>REGINA: And I mean that in
the best sense of the word.
>>ISAACSON: Yes, absolutely.
It's more
quintessentially human.
>>REGINA: Yes,
We're out of time,
and all I can say
is thank god that you and
your wife, Kristin, both
have these incredible
powers of observation
to put these pieces together.
>>ISAACSON: Well, we had a
good tutor, which was our son.
Without him, it couldn't
have happened-- and Betsy.
>>REGINA: And how's
he doing today?
>>ISAACSON: Rowan
is doing amazing.
He has his own web-based
television series
called "Endangerous"
about animals
that are both endangered and
dangerous, play on words.
So we've been tracking bears in
Romania, wolves in Yellowstone.
He's pretty stoked to produce
his own media around this.
He's extraordinary.
So there you go.
>>REGINA: Thank
you for really just
a beyond fascinating story,
a really profound story
with the way you put
it together and what
you're doing for others,
and I want to thank you
on behalf of everybody watching
who feels a little bit of hope
now as a result of seeing this.
>>ISAACSON: You're kind.
Thank you for having me on.
>>REGINA: To check out
the entire documentary
or purchase books and DVDs, you
can go to horseboyworld.com.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[THEME MUSIC]